# polkadot

The [Polkadot node operator](https://charmhub.io/polkadot) provides an easy-to-use way of deploying a Polkadot node, using the [Juju framework](https://juju.is/).

This repository is maintained by Dwellir, https://dwellir.com - Infrastructure provider for blockchain and web3.

## Description

[Polkadot](https://polkadot.network/) is a web3 blockchain ecosystem. This charm can be deployed as a validator, collator, bootnode, or RPC on any Polkadot derived blockchain, also known as parachains. The deployment config differs depending on the chain that is being deployed.

The charm starts the Polkadot client as a service, which takes its arguments from `/etc/default/polkadot` which in turn are set by the Juju config *service-args*. The Polkadot client itself is downloaded and installed from the config *binary-url*.

## Usage

With [Juju's OLM](https://juju.is/docs/olm) bootstrapping your cloud of choice, and a Juju model created within that cloud to host the operator, the charm can be deployed as:

    juju deploy polkadot

However, there are some configs which are required by the charm to correctly install and start running the Polkadot client:

- `binary-url=...` or `docker-tag=...`
- `service-args="... ..."` with the tags `--chain=...` and `--rpc-port=...` set

With those configs included, a standard deployment of the Polkadot node could look like:

    juju deploy polkadot --config binary-url=https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/releases/download/v0.9.43/polkadot --config service-args="--chain=polkadot --rpc-port=9933"

There are many more arguments available for the Polkadot client, which may or may not be relevant for your specific deployment. Read about them in detail in the [Polkadot node client](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot) source code or by accessing the help menu from the client itself:

    ./polkadot --help

### Deploying other node types

There are a number of different node types in the Polkadot ecosystem, all which use the same client software to run. That means that by changing the client's service arguments in the deployment of this charm, one can easily change which node type to deploy. Read more about the specific node types on the Polkadot docs pages; [validator](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-validator), [collator](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-collator), [bootnode](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/maintain-bootnode), [RPC](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/maintain-rpc).

#### Deploying a validator

    juju deploy polkadot --config binary-url=... --config service-args="--validator --chain=... --rpc-port=..."

#### Deploying a collator

    juju deploy polkadot --config binary-url=... --config service-args="--collator --chain=... --rpc-port=..."

#### Deploying a bootnode

    juju deploy polkadot --config binary-url=... --config service-args="--chain=... --rpc-port=... --listen-addr=/ip4/0.0.0.0/tcp/<port> --listen-addr=/ip4/0.0.0.0/tcp/<port>/ws"

#### Deploying an RPC node

    juju deploy polkadot --config binary-url=... --config service-args="--chain=... --name=MyRPC --rpc-port=... --rpc-methods=Safe"

### Juju relations/integrations

A powerful feature of the Juju framework is the ability to relate (integrate in Juju 3+) charms to each other. By relating two charms, they exchange data based on the interface used. There are a number of existing interfaces for well-known applications and several are being employed in this charm.

#### Prometheus relation

One of the interfaces used in this charm is to connect with Prometheus, which also happens to exist [as a charm](https://charmhub.io/prometheus2). Relating this node with a Prometheus deployment will with a single action let the Prometheus instance start scraping the data generated by the node, given that Prometheus is enabled for the node client (`--prometheus-external`).

Here is an example where the Polkadot and Prometheus charms are deployed in a Juju model residing in an AWS cloud, and then related to each other:

    juju deploy polkadot <node configurations> --constraints "instance-type=t3.medium root-disk=200G"
    juju deploy prometheus2 prometheus --constraints "instance-type=t3.small root-disk=20G"
    juju relate polkadot:polkadot-prometheus prometheus:manual-jobs  # Polkadot node data
    juju relate polkadot:node-prometheus prometheus:manual-jobs      # Container system data

#### Add Grafana

If you want to use a [Grafana instance deployed with Juju](https://charmhub.io/grafana) in your monitoring stack:

    juju deploy grafana
    juju relate prometheus:grafana-source grafana:grafana-source
    juju run-action --wait grafana/0 get-admin-password

#### The COS stack

An alternative to deploying a Prometheus instance which each node is to use what is known as the [Canonical Observability Stack](https://charmhub.io/topics/canonical-observability-stack). By levering the topology model of Juju and charm relations to automate integration, it provides an observability suite based on best-in-class, open-source observability tools.

The `cos_agent` interface is already supported by this Polkadot operator charm so if you've deployed an instance of the COS, integrate it with your node like this:

    juju deploy grafana-agent --channel edge          # In the same model as the Polkadot node
    juju relate grafana-agent <COS interfaces>
    juju relate polkadot:grafana-agent grafana-agent  # grafana-agent is also the name for the interface in this charm

Find more details on how to deploy and use COS [here](https://charmhub.io/topics/canonical-observability-stack/tutorials/instrumenting-machine-charms).

## Building

Though this charm is published on Charmhub there is also the alternative to build it locally, and to deploy it from that local build. It is built with the package charmcraft. See [charmcraft.yaml](charmcraft.yaml) for build details.
    
    sudo snap install charmcraft --classic
    charmcraft pack  # Assumes pwd is the polkadot-operator root directory

## System requirements

*Disclaimer: the system requriements to run a node in the Polkadot ecosystem varies, both depending on which chain is being run and which type of node it is. The example below should therefore be vetted against updated and reliable resources depending on your deployment specifications.*

This list of reference hardware is from [the official Polkadot docs](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/maintain-guides-how-to-validate-polkadot) and is an example of good practice for a validator node:

- CPU
  - x86-64 compatible;
  - Intel Ice Lake, or newer (Xeon or Core series); AMD Zen3, or newer (EPYC or Ryzen);
  - 4 physical cores @ 3.4GHz;
  - Simultaneous multithreading disabled (Hyper-Threading on Intel, SMT on AMD);
  - Prefer single-threaded performance over higher cores count.
- Storage
  - An NVMe SSD of 1 TB (As it should be reasonably sized to deal with blockchain growth). An estimation of current chain snapshot sizes can be found [here](https://paranodes.io/DBSize). In general, the latency is more important than the throughput.
- Memory
  - 32 GB DDR4 ECC.
- System
  - Linux Kernel 5.16 or newer.
- Network
  - The minimum symmetric networking speed is set to 500 Mbit/s (= 62.5 MB/s). This is required to support a large number of parachains and allow for proper congestion control in busy network situations.
